---
layout: post
title: "What is SAC?"
date: 2025-04-20
categories: RL
permalink: /RL/sac/
author: "Joonkyu Min"
---

**SAC** is an **off-policy actor-critic** method based on **maximum entropy RL**.
For stochastic policy agent, adding an additional entropy objective helps the agent's exploration. 

The following objective is typically used in **maximum entropy RL**.

$$
J(\pi)=\sum^T_{t=0}\mathbb{E}_{(s_{t}, a_{t})\sim \rho_{\pi}}[r(s_{t},a_{t})+ \beta H(\pi(\cdot\mid s_{t}))]
$$

SAC also iteratively repeats the policy evaluation and policy improvement as in standard actor-critic methods.

However, because we use the maximum entropy objective, the Bellman update is defined differently.
**Soft Bellman operator** for Q-function is defined from soft value function,

$$
\begin{align}
T^\pi Q(s,a) & =r(s,a)+\gamma \mathbb{E}_{s'\sim P}[V_{soft}(s')]  \\
V_{soft}(s') & = \mathbb{E}_{a'\sim \pi(\cdot \mid s')}[Q(s',a')-\beta \log \pi(a'\mid s')] \\
\end{align}
$$

which is also guaranteed that the Q-function converges. 

**Soft policy evaluation** is done by bootstrapping using this soft Bellman operator.

The optimal policy for the fixed Q-function is the softmax over Q-values, also known as Boltzmann distribution.

$$
\begin{align}
V^{*}(s’)  & = \max_{\pi} \mathbb{E}_{a’ \sim \pi} \left[ Q(s’,a’) - \beta \log \pi(a’|s’) \right] \\
\pi^*(a’|s’)  & = \frac{ \exp\left( Q(s’,a’) / \beta \right) }{ Z(s')}
\end{align}
$$

Therefore, **Soft policy improvement** is done by updating the actor to be close to the softmax distribution of Q-function.

$$
\begin{align}
\arg\min_{\pi}D_{KL}\left( \pi(\cdot\mid s)\parallel  \frac{\exp(Q^{\pi_{k}}(s,\cdot)/\beta)}{Z(s)} \right)
\end{align}
$$


---
**Reference**

Haarnoja, T., et al, "Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor," in International conference on machine learning, 2018, pp. 1861–1870.
